Introducing post mortems (#1277)
lmc-eu/spirit-design-system: docs/postmortems/2024-02-05-deprecated-icon-rendering.md

Reviewer: - sometimes you mix present and past times. 
- I would consider moving links to the bottom of the file as we do it elsewhere in the repository

Author: Please, check the time again. There were a few places where I was not quite sure.

---
date: 2024-02-05
authors: @literat
---

> # Excessive deprecation logging while rendering Icon component

Reviewer: title case please

Author: Fixed.

**Summary**

<!-- What is a one or two-line summary of the event that occurred? -->

> The `@lmc-eu/spirit-web-react@1.7.0` is shipped with a new deprecation warning about the `Icon` component.

Reviewer: I don't see the problem here. Maybe the summary should already include the problem it caused. What do you think?

Author: Yup, you are right. Added.

**Impact**

<!-- What was the scope of impact from the event occurring? How many teams were
impacted? -->

The teams that use the ` @lmc-eu/spirit-web-react@1.7.0`` and above are impacted by this deprecation warning.

>  `Since `many components use` the `Icon` component, the impact should be extensive in logs that appear in logs both in browser developer tools and in the server logs.

Reviewer: > the impact should be extensive in logs that appear in logs both in browser developer tools and in the server logs.

what

Author: Better?

>  `Since `many components use` the `Icon` component, the impact should be extensive in logs that appear in logs both in browser developer tools and in the server logs.

Author: Fixed.

**Root causes**:

<!-- Looking back, what ended up being the main reasons why this event occurred?
-->

> These deprecations should solve the problem with server-side rendering in the Next.js framework where the Icons were not rendered properly. The deprecation warning was added to the `Icon` component to inform the developers that the `Icon` component will use an `html-react-parser`. A developer should install this dependency to make the `Icon` component work properly. This dependency will parse included SVG and render them directly to the DOM. After this, the usage of the `dangerouslySetInnerHTML` will be obsolete. For the condition of whether to use the `Icon` rendered by `html-react-parser` or the `dangerouslySetInnerHTML` was created a new utility called `htmlParser` dynamically imports the library and returns the function or nothing. This solution was not working properly. Also, the deprecation warning appears in both cases of the usage of the `Icon` component.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
These deprecations should solve the problem with server-side rendering in the Next.js framework where the Icons were not rendered properly. The deprecation warning was added to the `Icon` component to inform the developers that the `Icon` component will use the `html-react-parser`. A developer should install this dependency to make the `Icon` component work properly. This dependency will parse included SVG and render them directly to the DOM. After this, the usage of the `dangerouslySetInnerHTML` will be obsolete. For the condition of whether to use the `Icon` rendered by `html-react-parser` or the `dangerouslySetInnerHTML` a new utility called `htmlParser` was created which dynamically imports the library and returns the function or nothing. This solution was not working properly. Also, the deprecation warning appeared in both cases of the usage of the `Icon` component.
```

The last sentence is weird. As I understand it, it looks like the component was used only twice.

Reviewer: Maybe generally split it into more sentences.

Author: Ok, fixed. Hope so...

**Detection**

<!-- How did we find out or discover that this event had occurred? -->

This problem was detected multiple times by the developers and the support question was raised in our Slack channel:

- https://almamedia.slack.com/archives/C068XPSDWQN/p1703704125308169
- https://almamedia.slack.com/archives/C068XPSDWQN/p1707125126127969
- https://almamedia.slack.com/archives/C068XPSDWQN/p1707215641782159

Also, the message appears in the browser console and the server logs:

```
Warning: Icon component is not supported in SSR without use of `html-react-parser`. Please install missing peer dependency.
```

**Resolution**

<!-- How did we end up addressing this event to mitigate the impact? -->

The deprecation warning was removed as unnecessary in the first place to remove that excessive logging.

> Secondly, the `html-react-parser` was added as a regular dependency and part of the `Icon` `component which `uses`the`dangerouslySetInnerHTML` was removed.

Reviewer: maybe turn this into steps?
1. ...deprecation warning...
2. ...HTML parser...
3. ...dangerously...

> Secondly, the `html-react-parser` was added as a regular dependency and part of the `Icon` `component which `uses`the`dangerouslySetInnerHTML` was removed.

Author: Fixed.

**Action Items**

<!-- What are the action items that came out of this postmortem? Reference
issues and Pull Requests in the "Bug" column with the appropriate owners -->

| Action item                    | Owner    | Bug                                                               |
| ------------------------------ | -------- | ----------------------------------------------------------------- |
| Remove the deprecation warning | @literat | [#1266](https://github.com/lmc-eu/spirit-design-system/pull/1266) |
| Require HTML parser            | @literat | [#1272](https://github.com/lmc-eu/spirit-design-system/pull/1272) |

> ## Lessons learned

Reviewer: title case please

Author: Fixed.

**Where we got lucky**

- Usage of the `warning` utility everywhere the deprecation is raised and the condition about the `production` environment ensures that the deprecation messages are raised only in the development environment.

## Timeline

2023-12-27 **(all times in UTC)**

- 20:08 First time spotted a problem with the SSR rendering of the Icon.

2024-01-10

- 11:46 Added the deprecation warning to the `Icon` component.

2024-02-05

- 10:25 Raised support question in the Slack channel.
- 11:34 Raised another support question in the Slack channel.

2024-02-06

- 12:24 @pavelklibani started to work on the support question
- 13:08 The new issue was added by @literat to the ticketing system - [DS-1145](https://jira.almacareer.tech/browse/DS-1145)
- 15:56 @literat came with the first version of the solution

2024-02-07

- 09:31 The solution was tested by @janicekt

> - 13:59 @literat make a call with @janicekt and agreed on the solution

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- 13:59 @literat had a call with @janicekt and agreed on the solution
```

Reviewer: or something like this

Author: Ok, fixed.

> - 16:04 @literat merged PR #1266

Reviewer: link to the PR?

Author: Fixed.

> - 16:24 `@lmc-eu/spirit-web-react@1.12.0` was released

Reviewer: you are not using UTC times :D

Author: CET/CEST. fixed.

> ## Supporting information

Reviewer: title case please

Author: Fixed.

---
date: 2024-02-05
authors: @literat
---

# Excessive Deprecation Logging While Rendering Icon Component

**Summary**

<!-- What is a one or two-line summary of the event that occurred? -->

The `@lmc-eu/spirit-web-react@1.7.0` is shipped with a new deprecation warning about the `Icon` component.
This deprecation caused massive logging in the browser console and server logs for every other component that used Icon component in it.

**Impact**

<!-- What was the scope of impact from the event occurring? How many teams were
impacted? -->

The teams that used the `@lmc-eu/spirit-web-react@1.7.0` and above were impacted by this deprecation warning.
Since many components are using the `Icon` component, the impact were extensive in warning messages that appeared in error logs both in browser developer tools and in the server logs.

**Root causes**:

<!-- Looking back, what ended up being the main reasons why this event occurred?
-->

> These deprecations should have solved the problem with server-side rendering in the Next.js framework where the Icons were not rendered properly. The deprecation warning was added to the `Icon` component to inform the developers that the `Icon` component will use the `html-react-parser`. A developer should have installed this dependency to make the `Icon` component work properly. This dependency should have parsed included SVG and rendered them directly to the DOM. After this, the usage of the `dangerouslySetInnerHTML` will be obsolete. For the condition of whether to use the `Icon` rendered by `html-react-parser` or the `dangerouslySetInnerHTML` a new utility called `htmlParser` was created which dynamically imported the library and returned the function or nothing. This solution was not working properly. Also, the deprecation warning appeared in both cases of the usage of the `Icon` component.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
These deprecations should have solved the problem with server-side rendering in the Next.js framework where the Icons were not rendered properly. The deprecation warning was added to the `Icon` component to inform the developers that the `Icon` component will use the `html-react-parser`. A developer should have installed this dependency to make the `Icon` component work properly. This dependency should have parsed included SVG and rendered them directly to the DOM. After this, the usage of the `dangerouslySetInnerHTML` will be obsolete. For the condition of whether to use the `Icon` rendered by `html-react-parser` or the `dangerouslySetInnerHTML` a new utility called `htmlParser` was created which dynamically imported the library and returned the function or nothing. This solution was not working properly. Also, the deprecation warning appeared in all usages of the `Icon` component, no matter the implementation used. 
```

Author: Fixed.

1. The deprecation warning was removed as unnecessary to remove that excessive logging.
2. The `html-react-parser` was added as a regular dependency.
3. The part of the `Icon` component which uses the `dangerouslySetInnerHTML` was removed.

**Action Items**

<!-- What are the action items that came out of this postmortem? Reference
issues and Pull Requests in the "Bug" column with the appropriate owners -->

| Action item                    | Owner    | Bug              |
| ------------------------------ | -------- | ---------------- |
| Remove the deprecation warning | @literat | [#1266][pr-1266] |
| Require HTML parser            | @literat | [#1272][pr-1272] |

## Lessons Learned

**What went well**

- We have dealt with this problem multiple times so we have a good idea of what is causing the problem.
- The product teams were able to quickly identify the problem and raise the question in the Slack channel.

**What went wrong**

- The lack of testing of the integration of the `html-react-parser` as dynamically imported dependency and the `Icon` component.
- A little awareness of how extensively is the `Icon` component used in our components and the product components.

> - We were adding multiple dependencies as peer dependencies and thought that the developers would deal with the installation

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- We were adding multiple dependencies as peer dependencies and thought that the developers would deal with the installation.
```

Author: Fixed.
